
This package includes software taken from the following sources:

(1) Software for suffix array construction.  Algorithm described in
G. Nong, Practical linear-time O(1)-workspace suffix sorting for
constant alphabets, ACM Transactions on Information Systems, July 2013.

Code obtained from
http://ge-nong.googlecode.com/files/saca-k-tois-20130413.zip, and
covered under the MIT License, as follows:

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
 
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.


(2) Software for bit packing and unpacking.  Algorithm described in
Daniel Lemire and Leonid Boytsov, Decoding billions of integers per
second through vectorization, Software Practice & Experience, to
appear.

Code obtained from https://github.com/lemire/FastPFor, and covered
under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (ASL2.0), available at
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.  The code was modified for
use in this project.


(3) Software for fast approximate logarithm and exponential
computations.  Code obtained from http://code.google.com/p/fastapprox,
and covered under the following license:

/*=====================================================================*
 *                   Copyright (C) 2012 Paul Mineiro                   *
 * All rights reserved.                                                *
 *                                                                     *
 * Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with             *
 * or without modification, are permitted provided that the            *
 * following conditions are met:                                       *
 *                                                                     *
 *     * Redistributions of source code must retain the                *
 *     above copyright notice, this list of conditions and             *
 *     the following disclaimer.                                       *
 *                                                                     *
 *     * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the             *
 *     above copyright notice, this list of conditions and             *
 *     the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or            *
 *     other materials provided with the distribution.                 *
 *                                                                     *
 *     * Neither the name of Paul Mineiro nor the names                *
 *     of other contributors may be used to endorse or promote         *
 *     products derived from this software without specific            *
 *     prior written permission.                                       *
 *                                                                     *
 * THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND              *
 * CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,         *
 * INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES               *
 * OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE             *
 * ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER               *
 * OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,                 *
 * INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES            *
 * (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE           *
 * GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR                *
 * BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF          *
 * LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT           *
 * (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY              *
 * OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE             *
 * POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.                                         *
 *                                                                     *
 * Contact: Paul Mineiro <paul@mineiro.com>                            *
 *=====================================================================*/
